layout = "post"
title = "Reinforcement Learning and Life Lessons"
created = "2026-03-04"
updated = "2026-03-04"
tags = "#reinforcement-learning #artificial-intelligence"
markdown = """
One of the most important concepts or ideas in RL is the balance or tension between exploration and exploitation. It is very important to understand these terms. In reinforcement learning, the learning agent interacts with its environment, makes observations and acts. And these actions either get rewarded or punished. Since these agents do not have neurotransmitters like animals do, a positive number is good enough for a reward and a negative number is bad enouhg as punishment. The goal of the learning agent is maximizing the total number that the reward represents. To do that it has two strategies. One is exploitation and the other is exploration. When the training starts the first time the agent tries random actions and finds some actions that give positive rewards. The agent can then decide to do that same action for a long time or even forever. This is called exploitation and it is a strategy that can get the agent a lot of rewards. The problem with the exploitation strategy is that the agents could find an action that gave even more rewards. On the other hand, the agent could keep exploring for a long tiem or even forever and try new actions but skip the ones that gave really high rewards because of exploring. As you can see, for the agent there is an important balance between exploitation and exploration, it is not good to stick with the first action that gives a reward and it is not good to constantly change your actions even if the some of them are rewarded very generously.

I was thinking about this and realized that real life is very similar. After all, most machine learning algorithms including RL are modeled after animal biology and behaviour. As a young person in life, as in the simulation, we do several actions. Some of us study hard at school and get rewarded early in life only to find out that life after school generally rewards the opposite behaviour. Or sometimes we find good relationships that rewards us but we still want to explore and since life is not a game, it is really hard to get back to a previous state.
"""